Beyond reward and Punishment
this essay appears in a collection of
essays called possible Minds published
by penguin press in February 2019.
epigraph
first murderer
We Are Men my liege
Macbeth
I in the catalog ego for men as hounds
and Greyhounds mongrels spaniels curse
shuffs water rugs and Demi wolves are
klept all by the name of dogs
William Shakespeare
for most of our species history
our ancestors were barely people
this was not due to any inadequacy in
their brains on the contrary even before
the emergence of our anatomically modern
human subspecies
they were making things like clothes and
campfires using knowledge that was not
in their genes
it was created in their brains by
thinking and preserved by individuals in
each generation imitating their elders
moreover this must have been knowledge
in the sense of understanding
because it is impossible to imitate
novel complex behaviors like those
without understanding what the component
behaviors are for
footnote
aping
imitating certain behaviors without
understanding
uses inborn hacks such as the mirror
neuron system
but behaviors imitated in that way are
drastically Limited in complexity
see Richard Byrne imitation as Behavior
parsing
such knowledgeable imitation depends on
successfully guessing explanations
whether verbal or not of what the other
person is trying to achieve and how each
of his actions contributes to that for
instance when he cuts a Groove in some
wood gathers dry kindling to put it in
and so on
the complex cultural knowledge that this
form of imitation permitted must have
been extraordinarily useful it drove
rapid evolution of anatomical changes
such as increased memory capacity and
more gracile less robust skeletons
appropriate to an Ever more
technology-dependent lifestyle
no non-human ape today has this ability
to imitate novel complex behaviors nor
does any present-day artificial
intelligence
but our pre-sapiens ancestors did
any ability based on guessing
must include means of correcting one's
guesses since most guesses will be wrong
at first there are always many more ways
of being wrong than right
Bayesian updating is inadequate because
it cannot generate novel guesses about
the purpose of an action only fine-tune
or at best choose among existing ones
creativity is needed
as the philosopher Karl Popper explained
creative criticism interleaved with
creative conjecture is how humans learn
one another's behaviors including
language and extract meaning from one
another's utterances
those are also the processes by which
all new knowledge is created they are
how we innovate make progress and create
abstract understanding for its own sake
this is human level intelligence
thinking
it is also or should be the property we
seek in artificial general intelligence
AGI
here I'll reserve the term thinking for
processes that can create understanding
explanatory knowledge
Papa's argument implies that all
thinking entities human or not
biological or artificial must create
such knowledge in fundamentally the same
way
hence understanding any of those
entities requires traditionally human
Concepts such as culture creativity
Disobedience and morality
which justifies using the uniform term
people to refer to all of them
misconceptions about human thinking and
human Origins are causing corresponding
misconceptions about AGI and how it
might be created
for example
it is generally assumed that the
evolutionary pressure that produced
modern humans
was provided by the benefits of having
an Ever greater ability to innovate
but if that was so there would have been
rapid progress as soon as thinkers
existed just as we hope will happen when
we create artificial ones
if thinking had been commonly used for
anything other than imitating
it would also have been used for
Innovation even if only by accident and
Innovation would have created
opportunities for further Innovation and
so on exponentially but instead there
were hundreds of thousands of years of
near stasis
progress happened only on time scales
much longer than people's lifetimes so
in a typical generation no one benefited
from any progress
therefore the benefits of the ability to
innovate can have exerted little or no
evolutionary pressure during the
biological evolution of the human brain
that Evolution was driven by the
benefits of preserving cultural
knowledge
benefits to the genes that is culture in
that era was a very mixed blessing to
individual people
their cultural knowledge was indeed good
enough to enable them to outclass all
other large organisms they rapidly
became the top predator Etc even though
it was still extremely crude and full of
dangerous errors
but culture consists of transmissible
information memes and meme Evolution
like Gene Evolution tends to favor High
Fidelity transmission
and High Fidelity meme transmission
necessarily entails the suppression of
attempted progress
so it would be a mistake to imagine an
idyllic Society of hunter-gatherers
learning at the feet of their Elders to
recite the Tribal Law by heart being
content despite their lives of suffering
and grueling labor and despite expecting
to die young and in agony of some
nightmarish disease or parasite because
even if they could conceive of nothing
better than such a life
those torments were the least of their
troubles for suppressing innovation in
human Minds without killing them
is a trick that can be achieved only by
Human Action and it is an ugly business
this has to be seen in perspective
in the civilization of the West today we
are shocked by the depravity of for
instance parents who torture and murder
their children for not Faithfully
enacting cultural norms and even more by
societies and subcultures where that is
commonplace and considered honorable
and by dictatorships and totalitarian
states that persecute and murder entire
harmless populations for behaving
differently
we are ashamed of our own recent past in
which it was honorable to beat children
bloody for mere Disobedience and before
that to own human beings as slaves
and before that
to burn people to death for being
infidels to the Applause and amusement
of the public
Stephen pinker's book the better angels
of our nature
contains accounts of horrendous evils
that were normal in historical
civilizations
yet even they did not extinguish
Innovation as efficiently as it was
extinguished among our forebears in
prehistory for thousands of centuries
footnote
Matt Ridley in the rational Optimist
rightly stresses the positive effect of
population on the rate of progress
but that has never yet been the biggest
Factor consider say ancient Athens
versus the rest of the world at that
time
that is why I say that prehistoric
people at least were barely people
both before and after becoming perfectly
human both physiologically and in their
mental potential they were monstrously
inhuman in the actual content of their
thoughts I'm not referring to their
crimes or even their cruelty as such
those are all too human
nor could mer cruelty have reduced
progress that effectively
things like the thumb screw and the
stake for the glory of the Lord
would normally have taken effect long
before they were in danger of inventing
heresies
from the earliest days of thinking
onward children must have been
cornucopias of creative ideas and
Paragons of critical thought otherwise
as I said they could not have learned
language or other complex culture
yet as Jacob bronowsky stressed in the
ascent of man
for most of History civilizations have
crudely ignored that enormous potential
children have been asked simply to
conform to the image of the adult the
girls are little mothers in the making
the boys are little herdsmen they even
carry themselves like their parents
but of course they weren't just asked to
ignore their enormous potential and
conform Faithfully to the image fixed by
tradition They Were Somehow trained to
be psychologically unable to deviate
from it
by now it is hard for us even to
conceive of the kind of Relentless
finely tuned oppression required to
reliably extinguish in everyone the
aspiration to progress
and replace it with Dread and revulsion
at any novel Behavior
in such a culture there can have been no
morality other than Conformity and
obedience
no other identity than one's status in a
hierarchy no mechanisms of cooperation
other than punishment and reward so
everyone had the same aspiration in life
to avoid the punishments and get the
rewards
in a typical generation no one invented
anything because no one aspired to
anything new because everyone had
already despaired of improvement being
possible
Not only was there no technological
innovation or theoretical Discovery
there were no New World Views styles of
art or interests that could have
inspired those
by the time individuals grew up they had
in effect been reduced to AIS programmed
with the Exquisite skills needed to
enact that static culture and to inflict
on the Next Generation their inability
even to consider doing otherwise
a present-day AI is not a mentally
disabled AGI
so it would not be harmed by having its
mental processes directed still more
narrowly to meeting some predetermined
Criterion
oppressing Siri with humiliating tasks
may be weird but it is not immoral nor
does it harm Siri on the contrary all
the effort that has ever increased the
capabilities of AIS has gone into
narrowing their range of potential
thoughts
for example take chess engines their
basic task has not changed from the
outset any chest position has a finite
tree of possible continuations
and the task is to find one that leads
to a predefined goal a Checkmate or
failing that a draw
but the tree is far too big to search
exhaustively
every Improvement in chess playing AIS
between Alan turing's first designed for
one in 1948 and today's has been brought
about by ingeniously confining the
program's attention or making it confine
its attention ever more narrowly to
branches likely to lead to that
immutable goal
then those branches are evaluated
according to that goal
that is a good approach to developing an
AI with a fixed goal under fixed
constraints
but if an AGI worked like that the
evaluation of each branch would have to
constitute a prospective reward or
threatened punishment and that is
diametrically the wrong approach if
we're seeking a better goal under
unknown constraints which is the
capability of an AGI
an AGI is certainly capable of learning
to win at chess
but also of choosing not to
or deciding in mid-game to go for the
most interesting continuation instead of
a winning one
or inventing a new game
a mere AI is incapable of having any
such ideas because the capacity for
considering them has been designed out
of its Constitution
that disability is the very means by
which it plays chess
an AGI is capable of enjoying chess
and of improving at it because it enjoys
playing or
of trying to win by causing an amusing
configuration of pieces as Grand Masters
occasionally do
or of adapting Notions from its other
interests to chess
in other words it learns and plays chess
by thinking some of the very thoughts
that are forbidden to chess playing AIS
an AGI is also capable of refusing to
display any such capability and then if
threatened with punishment of complying
or rebelling
Daniel Dennett in his essay for this
volume suggests that punishing an AGI is
impossible
like Superman they are too invulnerable
to be able to make a credible promise
what would be the penalty for promise
breaking being locked in a cell or more
plausibly dismantled
the very ease of digital recording and
transmitting the Breakthrough that
permits software and data to be in
effect Immortal removes robots from the
world of the vulnerable
but this is not so
digital immortality which is on the
horizon for humans too perhaps sooner
than AGI
does not confer this sort of
invulnerability making a running copy of
oneself entails sharing one's
possessions with it somehow including
the hardware on which the copy runs so
making such a copy is very costly for
the AGI
similarly courts could for instance
impose fines on a criminal AGI which
would diminish its access to physical
resources much as they do for humans
making a backup copy to evade the
consequences of one's crimes is similar
to what a gangster boss does when he
sends minions to commit crimes and take
the fall if Court
Society has developed legal mechanisms
for coping with this
but anyway the idea that it is primarily
for fear of punishment that we obey the
law and keep promises effectively denies
that we are moral agents our society
would not work if that was so
no doubt there will be AGI criminals and
enemies of civilization just as there
are human ones
but there is no reason to suppose that
an AGI created in a society consisting
primarily of decent citizens and raised
without what William Blake called Mind
forged manacles
will in general impose such manacles on
itself I.E become irrational and or
choose to be an enemy of civilization
the moral component the cultural
component
the element of free will
all make the task of creating an AGI
fundamentally different from any other
programming task
it is much more akin to raising a child
unlike all present day computer programs
an AGI has no specifiable functionality
no fixed testable Criterion for what
shall be a successful output for a given
input
having its decisions dominated by a
stream of externally imposed rewards and
punishments would be poisoned to such a
program as it is to creative thought in
humans
setting out to create a chess playing AI
is a wonderful thing
setting out to create an AGI that cannot
help playing chess
would be as immoral as raising a child
to lack the mental capacity to choose
his own path in life
such a person like any slave or
brainwashing victim would be morally
entitled to Rebel
and sooner or later some of them would
just as human slaves do
agis could be very dangerous exactly as
humans are
but people human or AGI who are members
of an open Society do not have an
inherent tendency to violence
the feared robot apocalypse will be
avoided by ensuring that all people have
full human rights
as well as the same cultural membership
as humans
humans living in an open Society the
only stable kind of society
choose their own rewards internal as
well as external
their decisions are not in the normal
course of events determined by a fear of
punishment
current worries about Rogue AIS mirror
those that have always existed about
rebellious youths namely that they might
grow up deviating from the culture's
moral values
but today the source of all existential
dangers from the growth of knowledge is
not rebellious youths but weapons in the
hands of the enemies of civilization
whether these weapons are mentally
warped or enslaved agis mentally warped
teenagers or any other weapon of mass
destruction
fortunately for civilization the more a
person's creativity is forced into a
mono maniacal Channel
the more it is impaired in regard to
overcoming unforeseen difficulties just
as happened for thousands of centuries
the worry that agis are uniquely
dangerous because they could run on ever
better Hardware is a fallacy since human
thought will be accelerated by the same
technology we have been using Tech
assisted thought since the invention of
writing and tallying
much the same holds for the worry that
agis might get so good qualitatively at
thinking that humans would be to them as
insects are to humans
all thinking is a form of computation
and any computer whose repertoire
includes a universal set of Elementary
operations can emulate the computations
of any other
hence human brains can think anything
that agis can subject only to
limitations of speed or memory capacity
both of which can be equalized by
technology
those are the simple do's and don'ts of
coping with agis
but how do we create an AGI in the first
place
could we cause them to evolve from a
population of ape type AIS in a virtual
environment
if such an experiment succeeded it would
be the most immoral in history for we
don't know how to achieve that outcome
without creating vast suffering along
the way
nor do we know how to prevent the
evolution of a static culture
Elementary introductions to computers
explain them as Tom the totally obedient
an inspired acronym that captures
the essence of all computer programs to
date
they have no idea what they are doing or
why
so it won't help to give AIS more and
more predetermined functionalities in
the hope that these will eventually
constitute generality The elusive G in
AGI
we're aiming for the opposite a data a
disobedient autonomous thinking
application
how does one test for thinking
by the Turing test
unfortunately that requires a thinking
judge
one might imagine a vast collaborative
project on the internet where an AI
hones its thinking abilities in
conversations with human judges and
becomes an AGI
but that assumes among other things that
the longer the judge is unsure whether
the program is a person the closer it is
to being a person
there is no reason to expect that
and how does one test for disobedience
imagine Disobedience as a compulsory
school subject with daily Disobedience
lessons and a Disobedience test at the
end of term
presumably with extra credit for not
turning up for any of that
this is paradoxical
so despite its usefulness in other
applications the programming technique
of defining a testable objective and
training the program to meet it will
have to be dropped
indeed I expect that any testing in the
process of creating an AGI risks being
counterproductive even immoral just as
in the education of humans
I share touring's supposition that we'll
know in AGI when we see one
but this partial ability to recognize
success
won't help in creating the successful
program
in the broadest sense a person's quest
for understanding is indeed a search
problem in an abstract space of ideas
far too large to be searched
exhaustively
but there is no predetermined objective
of this search there is as Papa put it
no Criterion of Truth nor of probable
truth especially in regard to
explanatory knowledge
objectives are ideas like any others
created as part of the search and
continually modified and improved so
inventing ways of disabling the
program's access to most of the space of
ideas won't help
whether that disability is inflicted
with the thumb screw and the stake or a
mental straight jacket
to an AGI
the whole Space of ideas must be open
it should not be knowable in advance
what ideas the program can never
contemplate
and the ideas that the program does
contemplate must be chosen by the
program itself using methods criteria
and objectives that are also the
program's own
its choices like an AIS will be hard to
predict without running it we lose no
generality by assuming that the program
is deterministic and AGI using a random
generator would remain an AGI if the
generator were replaced by a
pseudo-random one
but it will have the additional property
that there is no way of proving from its
initial State what it won't eventually
think short of running it
the evolution of our ancestors
is the only known case of thought
starting up anywhere in the universe
as I have described something went
horribly wrong and there was no
immediate explosion of innovation
creativity was diverted into something
else yet not into transforming the
planet into paper clips parche and Nick
Bostrom
rather
as we should also expect if an AI
project gets that far and fails
perverted creativity was unable to solve
unexpected problems this caused stasis
and worse thus tragically delaying the
transformation of anything into anything
but the enlightenment has happened since
then
we know better now